--- PAGE 1 ---
Introduction to the Trade 
Secret System: Overview and 
International Framework
Geneva, April 5, 2022
Dr. Nina Belbl, Associate Legal Officer, Patents and Treaties Law 
Section, Patent and Technology Law Division, WIPO

--- PAGE 2 ---
Structure
What is a trade secret?
International Framework
Requirements
Rights of trade secret holders? 
Enforcement
Patent vs. trade secret protection

--- PAGE 3 ---
Trade secrets- International Framework
Trade secret = IP right on confidential information
Paris Convention, Art.10bis 
Sets general obligations for Member States to provide effective protection against unfair competition - any act of competition contrary to honest practices in industrial or commercial matters 
TRIPS Agreement, Art. 39(2) 
1st multilateral instrument which provides minimum standards of protection of IP, including undisclosed information

--- PAGE 4 ---
What kind of information may be protected as a trade secret?
Broadly speaking, any confidential business information which provides (due to "secrecy") an enterprise with a competitive edge and is 
"secret" to others may be protected as a trade secret.
The nature of the information can be very different

--- PAGE 5 ---
Nature of the "secret" information? 
Examples:
Technical and scientific information https://zwackunicum.hu/en/markaink/unicum/

--- PAGE 6 ---
Nature of the "secret" information? 
Examples:
Commercial or financial information…

--- PAGE 7 ---
Nature of the "secret" information 
Examples: 
Negative information

--- PAGE 8 ---
Requirements for obtaining a trade secret
(according to Article 39 (2) TRIPS Agreement)

--- PAGE 9 ---
1. The information must be"secret"
"Secret" not generally known among or readily accessible to persons within the circles that normally deal with this kind of information 
Test on "accessibility" of information

--- PAGE 10 ---
2. The information must have commercial value because it is "secret"
Confers some economic benefit to the right holder
This benefit must derive specifically from the fact that it is not generally known, not just from the value of the information itself.
Value: actual or potential
Elements that may be considered:
Competitive advantage for the owner in using the TS
The cost for an outsider to duplicate the TS
Lost advantages to the TS owner resulting from disclosure to competitors

--- PAGE 11 ---
3. Reasonable steps to keep the information
"secret" 
Under most trade secret regimes: 
Without reasonable steps to remain
"secrecy" ≠ trade secret ! 
"Reasonable" case by case 
The test on the quality of measures taken to protect the information
importance of proper TS management/protection program

--- PAGE 12 ---
Examples of steps that may be reasonable

--- PAGE 13 ---
Examples of steps that may be reasonable 
TS management program may include:
Identification 
Education of employees
Identification and review periodically which employees "need to know" the TS and restrict access to only those
Application of physical and technological restrictions to access TS
Limitation and monitoring public access to buildings that house TS
Marking documents containing TS as "secret" or "confidential" 
Signing confidentiality / non-disclosure / non-compete agreements with relevant employees / outsiders who may get access to TS

--- PAGE 14 ---
Rights of trade secret owners according to Art.39(2) TRIPS
Possibility of preventing information from being disclosed to, acquired by, or used by others 
Contrary to "honest commercial practice" 
TRIPS footnote 10 at least practices such as:
Breach of contract, breach of confidence, inducement to breach
Acquisition of undisclosed information by third parties who knew, or were grossly negligent in failing to know, that such practices were involved in the acquisition

--- PAGE 15 ---
Rights of trade secret owners
As owner of an IP, a trade secret holder can
transfer the trade secret
licence the trade secret
But...due to the confidential nature of a trade secret it is more difficult than with a patent

--- PAGE 16 ---
What protection does a trade secret not offer? according to Art.39(2) TRIPS
Use of the same technical or commercial information, if acquired or developed independently 
• no protection against reverse engineering
• no protection against third party aquisition in good faith 
No defensive protection risk that your trade secret will be independently patented

--- PAGE 17 ---
Enforcement of Trade Secrets according TRIPS Agreement
Art. 1.2 TRIPS: TS are included in the categories of IP
Art. 41 TRIPS: Enforcement of IP applies to misappropriation and misuse of trade secrets 
A trade secret owner shall take action against alleged misapropriation
Regional/national laws provide different enforcement procedures
Attention: even if there is no term of protection for a TS enforcement of a misapropriation may be limited in time

--- PAGE 18 ---
Trade Secret or Patent?
Patent
Trade Secret
Registration
Yes
No, but in general, documentation needed
„Secrecy" of the information
No
Yes, condition of protection
Term of protection
Generally 20 years
Unlimited
Assingment
Yes
Yes, but more difficult
Licencing
Yes
Yes, but more difficult
Enforcement
Yes
Yes, but more difficult
Protection against revese engineering
Yes
No
Defensive protection
Yes
No

--- PAGE 19 ---
And now…What to do in practice????
Identify
Verify: Patent? Trade secret? Both?
In any case: pssssssst!!!
For patents:
Preparation of registration
For Trade secrets:
Reasonable steps/preparation of evidence
Advice from a regional/national expert can help a lot

--- PAGE 20 ---
More information on trade secrets
https://www.wipo.int/tradesecrets/en/
https://www.wipo.int/tradesecrets/en/tradesecrets_faqs.html
https://www.wipo.int/directory/en/contact.jsp?country_id=159&type
=ADMIN
https://www.wipo.int/meetings/en/2022/symposium-trade- secrets.html

--- PAGE 21 ---
Questions?
Thank you for your attention nina.belbl@wipo.int